The Project Gutenberg eBook of Little Paulina, by Mary Cowden Clark

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Little Paulina
       Christmas in Russia

Author: Mary Cowden Clark

Contributor: Anna Robinson

Release Date: December 22, 2020 [eBook #64103]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Charlene Taylor, Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was
             produced from images generously made available by The Internet
             Archive/American Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE PAULINA ***


                            [Illustration]




                                Little

                                Paulina

                            [Illustration]

                          Christmas in Russia

                             ADAPTED FROM
                          MARY COWDEN CLARKE
                                  BY
                             ANNA ROBINSON

                       [Illustration: colophon]

                                BOSTON
                         DANA ESTES & COMPANY
                              PUBLISHERS

                           _Copyright, 1906_
                        BY DANA ESTES & COMPANY

                         _All rights reserved_


                            LITTLE PAULINA


                            Colonial Press
            Electrotyped and Printed by C. H. Simonds & Co.
                           Boston, U. S. A.




                  LITTLE PAULINA: CHRISTMAS IN RUSSIA


It was nearing the close of a short winter’s day,--the day before
Christmas. Thickly fell the snow, fiercely keen blew the northern wind,
heaping the drifts into crannies and gullies, and then whirling them far
and wide. The fir-trees were all behung with wreaths of sheeted white,
that the next blast flung abroad in scattered showers. The sky lowered
above all, gray, cheerless, and hopeless, as a man--setting his teeth
hard, and facing the inclemency as he best might--cast his eyes up
toward the heavens, and then looked around him, with an air that bespoke
his having lost his way amid the solitudes of the pine forest.

He might have been a denizen of the place, for the coarseness and even
squalor of his clothing. The rough tunic and cloak of sheepskin, the
bearhide gloves, and wolfskin cap befitted the meanest serf. But for all
his peasant garb, it was clear he was a stranger in this part of the
country.

With one more perplexed look about him, he suddenly shouted aloud. The
sound seemed dulled and deadened by the damp, frozen air and the
curtained canopy of overhanging trees.

His voice seemed shut in, like himself, within the confines of this
dreary wood prison. Yet once again he shouted,--once again sent forth an
appealing cry for aid,--if it might be that human aid was near. And
then--amid the gloom and silence--there came an answering sound,--a cry
high-pitched, but dulled by distance and by seeming lack of power in the
shouter.

The man turned his steps in the direction of the response he had heard,
calling loudly. It was repeated, and evidently drew nearer. Just then he
emerged from among the thickest of the trees, into a more open space, a
sort of pathway leading through the forest.

Along this track he could now see, coming toward him, a small, dark
figure, muffled in fur. It looked like a black bundle, more than a human
being. The head was enveloped in a dark sheepskin cap, that fitted so
closely around the face as to show only eyes, nose, and mouth. The body
was wrapped in a cloak, and the lower limbs were encased in thick
leggings and boots. Except that the head and shoulders were plentifully
sprinkled with snow, and the small patch of face looked bright and rosy,
the whole seemed a moving ball, of coarse, dark, furry stuff.

But the rosy patch looked cheerily. The dark leggings stumped along with
an alert, assured step; and it was evident that from this small muffled
individual came the high-pitched cry that had answered the man’s call
for help.

The man hastened to meet the child, saying:--

“Well met, little one! Direct me out of this wood. Be my guide. You
doubtless know every winding of the forest path.”

“I am a stranger in these parts,” the child answered. “I came from the
capital. I live in Kief--that is, I did live there. I am going to find a
home with my father.”

“And where is your father?” said the man.

“They banished him--he’s in exile--I am going to him,” she replied.

“Going to him! Do you know how far it is to the frozen regions whither
culprits are banished, little one?” asked the man.

“Yes; I know it is a long way off--but I have managed to come nearly a
fourth of my journey, and I shall get through the rest, never fear.”

“‘Never fear!’ But don’t you fear? It’s a long way, and a fearful place
when you get there.”

“I know it is; but if it’s bad for me, it’s bad for my father,--and it
will make the place better for him if he have his little Paulina with
him, to help him bear its fearfulness.”

“I am not speaking of what it is to him. It would be more tolerable to
him, I dare say, with his child to keep him company there; but what I
mean is, that it will be a terrible place for you--you don’t know its
horrors.”

“Oh, yes, I do. They told me of them when he was banished. They tried to
prevent my going after him, but I got away. I made my escape--I crept
out of the house--I watched my opportunity--I managed to get past the
sentinels at the city gates--I have made my way, by little and little. I
shall reach there, never fear.” And she nodded with an assured air, as
she repeated the last words.

The man shook his head. “You don’t know the place you are so eager to
reach, my little maid,” he said.

“I dare say it’s very dreadful; but, however bad it may be, home is
worse now,--without my father.”

“And who is your father?” said the man.

The child was just about to answer in her prompt, straightforward way;
but she caught the earnest, scrutinizing look of the stranger, as his
eye rested upon her, while he asked the question. She checked herself,
and said: “Didn’t you say you had lost your way in this forest? Do you
live far from here?”

An odd smile passed over the man’s face, as he answered: “Yes; very far.
I have wandered among the depths of this forest till I’m perishing with
cold, and starving with hunger. I want food and shelter. How far
distant is the next village?”

“They told me it was some miles on,” said the child. “But I’ll tell you
what I’ll do for you. Instead of taking you on with me there, I’ll turn
back with you, to the good woman at whose hut I slept last night. She
gave me a night’s lodging, and I dare say she’ll do as much for you. She
has a kind heart.”

The same smile passed over his face, as the man replied: “If you present
me to her as your friend,--an unfortunate fellow who has lost his
way,--I have no doubt she will take me under her roof. And, truly, in
this snow-storm, the sooner food and warmth may be had, the better. But
in securing them for me, you are hindering your journey, little one.
Shall you not grudge the delay?”

“It will be but a few hours. You need my help. If I turn out of my way
to give it you, my journey afterward will prosper the better,” she said.
“My father would approve of it.”

“Your father is a worthy man, then?”

“You seem to doubt it!” said the child, turning a flashing eye up toward
the speaker.

“If he be so,--and his teaching his child charity and kindliness of
conduct speaks in his favor,--how comes it that the emperor banished
him?” returned the man.

“The emperor was made to believe unjustly of my father. Enemies
misrepresented his actions. My father was too proud to vindicate himself
to his sovereign, even had he had the opportunity of pleading his own
cause.”

Again the man smiled, and then fell into a reverie, while his young
conductress took him by the hand, and led him along the path by which
she had come. After a time she looked up into his face, and, seeing its
dreamy expression, said: “You are feeling sleepy, are you not? Beware of
that!”

“I do find myself drowsily inclined,” said the man. “The cold--the long
fast--the many hours’ wandering--I own I shall be glad of a moment’s
rest, little one. Let us stop here a few minutes.”

And he would have leaned against the trunk of one of the nearest trees
skirting the forest track; but the child exclaimed vehemently,--tugging
at his hand: “No, no! you must not rest. Anything but that! Rouse
yourself! Come on, come on! Here, take me up in your arms, and carry me
for a little way. The exertion will do you good, and the warmth of my
body will help to unnumb you. Lift me up; be quick!”

The man laughed, but obeyed her peremptory order. There was such an air
of decision in all she said and did,--as if it were the only right thing
to be said or done,--that it was difficult to resist her commands. In
the present instance, the course she had appointed was certainly the
best that could have been hit upon for averting the threatened danger.

The effort of raising her helped the man to throw off the overpowering
sensation of drowsiness that was fast seizing upon him; and when she was
in his arms, she nestled close to him, and hugged him around the neck.
She was a slight child of her age, so that she was not inconveniently
heavy; yet, had she been even heavier, the man, though unaccustomed to
bear such weights, would have willingly gone on carrying her.

“Do you know, I have just such a little girl of my own,--a little
daughter,--perhaps a year or two younger than you, with whom I was going
to spend the Christmas Day, when, owing to an accident, I became lost in
the forest. I should like my little girl to thank you for your care of
her father. I wish she could see you. What say you to coming with me to
my home, and making friends with her?”

“I should like it very much; but you live far from here, and I must not
let anything interfere with my journey to my father.”

“But my home--at least, the place where my little girl now is--lies all
in your way. You must pass it going to your father. We’ll journey
together, as far as we can. Our first concern is, to get back to your
friendly peasant woman’s hut, recruit our strength, and afterward to
devise some means of getting on. Perhaps she can provide us with a
guide.”

“Trust to me, I’ll guide you,” said the child.

He laughed but made no reply.

“Now you’ve got over your drowsiness, you can set me down again,” she
resumed.

“But you’ll be glad of the lift. You must be tired,” said the man; “and
I don’t mind carrying you, if it rests you.”

“Oh, I’m not at all tired. I’ve learned to walk a good long way, now,
without wanting to rest. Set me down, please. It will do us both good to
be in sharper exercise. Here, let’s run! It’ll warm us. Come! One, two,
three, and away!”

The man hesitated. “I’m not in the humor to run,” he said, laughing.

“Nonsense! It’ll do you good! You must!” she replied. “The less you feel
inclined to stir quickly, the more necessary it is you should exert
yourself. It’s only the numbing effect of this bleak air. You feel
chilled inside, don’t you? But, never mind! Nothing like a race to cure
you. Now, then! Give me your hand! Let’s start for that clump of low
bushes, yonder!”

She planned several of these running matches, fixing the starting-posts,
appointing the goals, arranging and deciding all the particulars. And
when they had been successively achieved, she turned to the man, and
said with an air of satisfied triumph: “Well! wasn’t I right? You feel
warmer now, don’t you?”

He returned her nod with another, smiling, and highly entertained. But
she, quite gravely, rejoined: “Of course; and yet, if I had not made you
take a good run, you’d have kept creep-creep-creeping along, till your
blood had become as stagnant as the surface of our Dnieper, when it’s
frozen into ice a foot thick. Besides, the race has not only made you
warm, it has beguiled the way; for here is the good woman’s hut close at
hand. Now, once more. Give me this much start, and I’ll beat you!”

[Illustration]

The good peasant woman received her little guest of overnight and her
companion with much hearty kindness.

“’Tis a wild place,” she said, “and when one of these sudden snow-storms
come on, ’tis hard for us--let alone a stranger--to find the way out.”

“I’ve given him a helping hand as far as I can,” said the child with
her decisive nod. “Now it’s for you to do your share, and kindly give
him a meal, as you did me last night.”

“What I have, he shall be welcome to,” said the woman.

“Thanks, mistress,” replied the man. “I sha’n’t forget you; and one day
or other--” he paused; and Paulina finished his sentence for him. “One
day or other,” she said, “it may be your chance to meet with some poor
body even worse off than yourself. Do what you can for them. That will
be the best way of returning this good woman’s kindness to us.”

The child said this while she was bustling about, helping the woman to
spread the table, and prepare the meal. She trotted about diligently,
seeming to know where everything was kept, and making herself quite at
home.

She still kept the poor stranger under her immediate protection,
providing for his accommodation and comfort, pointing a seat out for him
near to the hearth; relieving him of his outer cloak, and hanging it up
on a nail; lifting the fur cap from his head, and beating the snow out
of it, before she replaced it; hovering about him, and paying him those
little fondling attentions, half-cherishing, half-deferential, which
mark the conduct of a child toward an indulgent parent.

Presently she came and sat down beside him on the settle. “What a
curious ring you have upon this finger. It’s something like one that my
father used to wear. But his was an emerald; and this is, of course, a
bit of green glass. Still, it’s very pretty,--it looks almost as well.
Indeed, it’s larger; and here are some curious characters engraved upon
it. Who gave it you?”

“It was my father’s,” said the man.

“Then, of course, not in the worst poverty could you part with it,” said
she. “It is a false stone, isn’t it?”

“Having passed from father to son, for many generations, and from my
own father’s hands into mine, it possesses a value for me beyond the
most priceless gem,” answered he.

“And it really is pretty in itself,” said the child, “and very curious.
These characters are like those I have heard my father describe upon the
imperial signet; he said his own ring was very like the emperor’s, only
smaller, and quite plain. Yours is about the size,--and with just such
characters. Perhaps it was made in imitation; but, though it’s an
imitation jewel, it’s very bright and pretty. It’s just as good as if it
were real.”

[Illustration]

“Just,” said the man. “I’m quite satisfied with it. The emperor’s own
signet-ring couldn’t content me better.”

“Ah, but it would me,” said the child. “If I had that, I’d soon use it
to some purpose. I’d affix it to the deed which should repeal my
father’s sentence.”

She turned the ring round and round upon the man’s finger, as his hand
still lay in hers, sighed thoughtfully, then looked out toward the still
falling snow, saying: “But I am dreaming of what I should like to
happen, when I ought to be working at what I can do. We stay too long.
Come, let us be going.”

“The afternoon is set in for a continued fall of snow,” said the peasant
woman. “Best not to venture into the forest now. Nightfall will overtake
you before you can reach the village. Abide another night here, and set
out to-morrow early. You will be all the better for the rest.”

“But even if you are so kind as to let me sleep here again, and share
your eldest child’s cot, as I did before, how can you manage for our
poor friend here?” said the little girl, pointing to the stranger.

“The good man can lie upon this settle, by the side of the hearth.
’Twill be a warm, snug berth for him; and if it be a little rough or
hard, he has lain upon many a rougher and harder, I’ll warrant,” said
the woman with a good-humored smile.

“The field of battle is a harder couch. Stretched wounded upon the earth
in the open air is rougher lying than upon this good settle,” replied
the man.

“You are warm now, hands and all,” said the child. “I will leave you for
a little while, that I may help our kind hostess. While she and I are
about it, you can rock the cradle with your foot.”

While thus busily engaged, Paulina was struck by a sound in the outer
room, as of talking. She listened. She could not distinguish the words,
but she felt certain that she heard another man’s voice in reply to that
of the stranger. The talking was carried on in a low, whispered tone,
but talking she assuredly heard.

When she returned to the room, however, the stranger was alone, and
sitting in precisely the same attitude as she had left him,--bending
over the wood embers, spreading his hands to catch their welcome warmth,
and with one foot resting on the rocker of the cradle.

“You see, I am obeying your commands,” he said, glancing with a smile
toward the cradle.

[Illustration]

“I’m glad to see you can profit by good example,” she said. “I fancied
you were neglecting your duty, and so came to remind you of it. But it’s
all right. I made a mistake, I see.”

The next morning, at daybreak, Paulina was astir, and preparing to set
out. She went to rouse the stranger, whom she found still fast asleep on
the settle.

“Awake, awake! It is time we were off,” she said, as she shook him by
the shoulder.

“How now!” exclaimed the man, angrily, as he half-started up,
half-opened his eyes, and looked around him in surprise.

“It is a fine morning. The snow has ceased. We ought to be on our way.
Come! up with you!” said the child.

“It is too early,--by and by,--another hour’s rest,” muttered the man,
as he let himself fall back upon the settle.

“I can’t afford to wait an hour longer,” said Paulina. “If you prefer
another hour’s sleep to my guidance, stay behind. But, take my word; you
had much better go with me through the wood. Remember how you lost
yourself yesterday. Well, what say you? Decide at once; for I am in a
hurry to be off.”

“Since you will have it so,--I suppose I must,” said the man, yawning,
stretching, and rising reluctantly. “But what a terrible tyrant you are,
my little protectress.”

“It’s all for your good,” returned she. “I want to set out early, in
order that we may reach the village on the other side of the wood before
evening.”

The man laughed; while she alertly set before him the black bread and
the warm milk and water, which the good woman had provided for their
breakfast, and brought him his sheepskin cloak, and helped to fasten it
under his chin.

The weather had quite cleared up. For a Russian climate, the day was
fine; and the two wanderers made their way through the forest with such
good speed that it was still early in the afternoon when they reached
the village. It was a very small hamlet, consisting of a few
wood-cutters’ huts. At the door of the most important looking among
them, which served as a sort of post-house, there stood a sledge,
surrounded by a small retinue of attendants, as if awaiting the master.
Paulina lingered a moment to admire the pretty trappings of the vehicle,
its soft cushions, its fur and velvet linings, the bright harness, and
the elegant shape of the coach itself.

Her companion asked one of the men standing near, whither the sledge was
bound.

“We are going to take it for our master to Igorhof,” replied the
attendant.

“The very place where my daughter is.”

[Illustration]

“As the sledge is going empty to Igorhof, I wonder whether these people
would allow us to ride in it,” said the man. “I should dearly love to
reach Igorhof on Christmas Day. I’ll tell them I’m not so poor as I
seem, and that, if they’ll trust my word and allow us to ride, I’ll pay
them for their courtesy when we arrive at Igorhof, where I have friends
and money.”

“But is that true?” asked the child.

“Perfectly true,” answered the man.

“We can but try, then,” said Paulina. “It would help us on our way
delightfully. But I’m afraid they won’t believe such shabbily dressed
people as you and I; and perhaps they will object to our riding in the
fine coach, lest we should soil it, and they get into disgrace with
their master. Still, we can but try. After all, if they refuse, we are
but where we were.”

“To be sure,” said the man. “Besides, I can offer them my ring as a
pledge for the money I promise them, until we reach Igorhof.”

“But as it’s a false stone, they won’t care to take it,” said the child.
“And if they believe it real, and accept it for such, that would be
deceiving them.”

“Never mind, I can but try,” repeated the man.

“Well, you can try if they’ll take it, when you have owned it to be
false; but tell the truth.”

“Never fear; I’ll say nothing but the truth--the exact truth,” said the
man, as he advanced toward one of the attendants.

Paulina could not hear exactly what passed between them; but she saw the
stranger show the groom his ring. She saw that there was an
explanation,--a request made,--and, at length, acquiescence given.

The man returned to her side. “He has consented,” said he, “and has
undertaken for his fellows to agree that we shall occupy the empty
carriage as far as Igorhof.”

“That will be charming!” exclaimed the child. “I hope they’ll not be
long before they set out.”

“Well done, eagerness!” exclaimed the man. “But you forget that I’ve
fasted since daybreak, and I must have something to eat. I’ll go into
the house, and see what’s to be got.”

“Well, be quick,” said Paulina.

“Won’t you come in and have some, too?” asked the man. “You must be
hungry.”

“Yes, I’m hungry; but I don’t want to come into the house. It’ll only
take up time. You can bring me out something to eat.”

By the time the two wanderers had partaken of some refreshment, the
equipage and retinue were prepared to start. The man helped the little
girl into the luxurious coach, took his place beside her, and the next
instant they were off at a smart pace. As the sledge glided smoothly
over the frozen snow, and the dark objects that skirted the way seemed
to be flying past, and the road to be melting before them,--as she felt
herself borne swiftly and easily along, Paulina could have believed
herself in some pleasant dream, so wondrous did it all appear. She sat
breathless, fixed, and perfectly upright, unable as yet to yield herself
to the full luxury of her position, in the bewilderment of its novelty.

“Presently,” she said. “I can hardly yet make myself believe that it is
all real; that I am actually flying on thus, speedily and delightfully,
instead of toiling along on foot. It is like magic. It must be a fairy
car.”

“In truth,” said the man, “it does seem a marvellously well-contrived
sort of affair, this sledge coach. See here, what commodious pouches in
the side! Well stored, I dare swear, with comforts of all kinds. Ay,
here is a shawl for the throat. Truly, the owner must be a fellow of
some taste to provide thus for his accommodation in travelling.”

“The credit for the arrangements may belong to his servants,” said
Paulina. “But, at any rate, I think he would not be pleased to see his
private comforts appropriated by a stranger,” she added, as she observed
the man, to her great vexation, twisting the shawl around his neck.

“Let the things alone. Take off the shawl. Give it to me. I’ll put it
away, on this side, out of your reach.”

The man laughed, but did as she bade him.

“You think I’m not proof against temptation, little one,” he said. “Do
you doubt my honesty? What sort of man do you take me for?”

“It is difficult to make you out exactly,” said the child. “You said
something this morning that made me think you had been a soldier; yet
you didn’t say so, absolutely. You may be an honest man,--but I don’t
know. You say you are not so poor as you seem. What is your profession?”

“Profession? I don’t profess anything--I--make no professions,” he said,
smiling.

“You are evading my question,” she said, gravely. “I mean, what is your
trade,--your calling?”

“I am no tradesman,--and as for my calling--”

He hesitated; and the child, looking steadily into his face, said: “You
avoid answering me directly about yourself, yet you wonder that I don’t
tell you at once all about my father. Let us each keep our own secrets,
and be good friends. Come, tell me a little about your daughter. How
tall is she? Is she pretty? And is she very fond of you?”

“You will see her soon, I hope, and judge for yourself,” answered the
man. “But in my eyes she is very pretty, and she is certainly very fond
of her father.”

“Yes,” answered Paulina, gravely. “But,” continued she, “I dare say your
daughter seems pretty to you because she has a kind and loving face. I
can believe that she is really pretty, as well as pretty from
affectionate looks and from being fond of her father.”

“And pray what may be your reason for believing this?” rejoined he.

“Because you have rather a nice face yourself,” she said.

“Rather a nice face!” echoed the man, still laughing. “Is that all the
praise you can find for me? I assure you, I am accounted passing
handsome; nay, I have been told a thousand times that I am the
handsomest man in all my--in all these dominions.”

“Absurd!” said Paulina.

“The handsomest man in all Russia--the handsomest man of my time--they
have actually said, over and over again!”

“Ridiculous!” exclaimed she. “And impudent! They were either
joking,--laughing at you in their sleeve,--or trying to wheedle you.”

“Humph!” responded the man in the tone of one who half assents, half
feels posed. “But, here we are at Igorhof,” he added, as the sledge drew
up at the gates of a large mansion but indistinctly seen now through the
gray twilight of a Russian evening.

“You are getting out, here?” said the child. “Have you much farther to
go before you reach the place where your daughter is?”

“No; ’tis close by. Give me your hand. ’Tis my turn to guide you, now.”

He led her on,--she could not see exactly where, by reason of the
deepening darkness; but it seemed to her as though they crossed a
spacious area or courtyard, in the direction of the grand mansion
indistinctly seen.

They stopped at a small side door, which he opened, and entered. Within
was a kind of vestibule, lighted by the softened light of a lamp, that
hung at the foot of a winding staircase.

“Have you a right here? Are you not making your way into a strange
house?” said Paulina, hanging back, as the man prepared to mount the
stairs, still holding her by the hand.

“Trust to me--as I trusted you, in the forest,” said the man, smiling.
“Trust to me, and,--to use your own word,--never fear!”

As he finished speaking, they reached the top of the staircase;

[Illustration]

and, throwing open a door which stood opposite to them on the
landing-place, the man led her forward into a spacious room, richly
furnished, hung with tapestry, and lighted by a large silver lamp
suspended from the ceiling.

The man threw a hasty glance around, as if in search of some one; then,
muttering, “She will be here soon,” threw himself upon one of the
cushioned couches, as if thoroughly wearied. Presently, his eye rested
upon some papers that lay piled upon the table. He drew the heap toward
him, and began turning them over, when his hand was arrested by
Paulina’s exclaiming: “How can you? Don’t you know it is dishonorable to
peer into papers that belong to others?”

“Humph! You keep a strict eye upon me, my little guardian. This is one
of my doings, I suppose, that you don’t approve of?”

“It is,” said Paulina.

“And the others, pray? What may they be?” he rejoined.

“I didn’t like your meddling with the articles in the sledge pockets; I
didn’t like your creeping into this house without announcing yourself.
It makes me sometimes suspect--”

“Well?” said the man.

“That you are,--in short, that you are--a thief.”

The man was still laughing at this uncompromising reply, when the door
of the apartment opened, and a little girl entered. She was very young,
but there was such ease, grace, and high breeding in her air, that she
seemed older than she really was.

As she advanced into the room, she gazed with a quiet wonder at the two
strange figures there; but, looking more intently at the man,--whose
coarse, rude garments at first prevented her recognizing him,--she
sprang forward, and threw herself into his arms, exclaiming, “Father!
dear father!”

He embraced her fondly in return, and for a few moments they were
wholly engrossed with each other. Presently, he turned to where Paulina
stood in mute astonishment at this scene, and said: “But I must not
forget my little preserver. Thank her, Hermione. I owe her my life. She
helped me out of that confounded wood, where I might have wandered on
till now--or perished, starving of cold and hunger. She saved me from
the snow sleep, in which I might have been frozen to death. She guided
me through all these mortal dangers, to say nothing of her keeping guard
upon my morals.”

[Illustration]

He was laughing heartily as he concluded, but Paulina never altered from
the serious look with which she regarded him. She kept her eyes steadily
upon his face, with the grave scrutiny with which from time to time she
had observed him, ever since she had had doubts of his being the poor
destitute creature he had seemed at first.

“Well, little one, have you made up your mind yet about me?” he said.

“I have heard of robbers going out prowling in poor shabby clothes, and
having a rich home, with plenty of luxuries to come to,” she said in her
straightforward way; “so you may still be what I took you for,--a thief.
But somehow I don’t think you are, now.”

“And pray what may have altered your opinion?” said he.

“Your daughter,” she replied. “Since I have seen her, I think you must
be an honest man,--an honorable man, a gentleman,--for all you are
meanly dressed. Perhaps that may have been from some chance--some
accident, and that you are, in fact, some great lord.”

“Well done! Well aimed!” he exclaimed. “Come,” added he, “I’ll make a
bargain with you. If you’ll tell me your father’s name, I’ll tell you
who I am.”

“As I believe you to be honorable,” she said, keeping her eyes upon his
face, “I will tell you his name. It is Vladimir Betzkoi.”

The man’s brow darkened, then contracted into a frown. But after a few
seconds it cleared, and he muttered, “I will not believe it. His child’s
artless speeches and conduct bear proof that he must be a man of worth
and probity. At all events, I will have it looked to.”

Then he added aloud: “You did me no less than justice, little one, in
believing me a man of honor. Now that you have trusted me with your
father’s name, I will use all my power to have his case inquired into.”

“You will interest your friends! You will use your influence with them
to have my father’s case properly represented to the emperor! You will
do what you can for us!” exclaimed Paulina, her eyes sparkling with joy,
and fixed eagerly and hopefully upon the man’s face. He nodded and she
went on: “I remember. You said you knew the master of this house. He
must be a rich man--a powerful lord--you will interest him? You will
speak to him in my father’s behalf?”

Again the man nodded; and again Paulina went eagerly on: “Will you let
me see your friend, and tell him myself? The master of the house!
Perhaps he’s at home now! Come, let us go to him at once!” she
exclaimed, starting up, and seizing the man’s arm.

“Softly, softly, little one,” answered he, smiling. “You forget how
tired I am with my wanderings.”

“I am thoughtless, selfish,--I forget all, in my one concern for my
father; but you will forgive his daughter for her sake, won’t you?” said
Paulina, pointing to Hermione, and then proceeding to bustle about, as
she had done at the peasant’s hut, drawing off his gloves, and helping
him remove his cloak.

His daughter joined her in her ministry, with her own quiet, gentle, yet
decided manner. She had stood by her father’s side the whole time, with
one arm upon his shoulder, as he sat; while he held her in one of his,
passed around her waist.

“You have fasted, then?--you have been delayed on your journey?--some
accident?--these clothes?” she now said, in her tender voice, full of
affectionate interest, though so gentle and low. “Dear father, tell me
what has happened. But first you must need refreshment. They shall bring
supper here.”

“Ay, let it be so,” he answered. “And, Hermione,” he went on, beckoning
her to lean down and listen to something that he whispered in her ear.
She looked in his face with a smile, as he concluded, and then glided
swiftly from the room to give her orders.

Presently Hermione returned, followed by a train of servants, with
preparations for the meal. Some spread the table; while others drew near
to the couch where the man sat, bearing a furred dressing-gown and
slippers.

Paulina put out her hand for the latter.

The attendant would have withheld them, but, at a sign from the man,
gave them to her. She put them carefully on his feet, saying: “Now for
your wrapping-gown.”

The other attendant stepped forward, about to hold it ready; but Paulina
took that also from his hands, with “No, no; give it me. I’ll put it on.
I’ll step on the stool, on tiptoe; and I shall be able to reach.”

“Let her do it,” said the man, and with his amused smile.

“You have not yet told me your name,” she resumed. “If you’re not a
thief, you do not keep your promises, and that’s nearly as bad.”

There was a stir, and a look of amazement among the attendants; but the
next moment it subsided.

“Is not that rather a rude way of reminding a person of his promise?”
asked Hermione, with her calm smile.

“I don’t mean to be rude, but I speak the truth,” said Paulina, in her
grave way, which was too sincere, earnest, and straightforward to be
insolent. “I observed my part of the bargain at once. I put myself in
your father’s power by trusting him with the name he asked; and I
expected he would keep his word with me in return.”

“He will do so, be sure,” said Hermione, smiling, and looking at her
father.

He nodded, saying: “But let us have some supper first.”

He chatted gaily, and seemed in high spirits, and very happy, as he sat
between the two little girls, his daughter Hermione on one side of him,
Paulina on the other.

“How came you to tell me such a fib about your daughter?” said Paulina,
suddenly.

“How do you mean?” was the reply.

“You told me she was pretty, didn’t you?”

“Yes; don’t you think her so?”

“No; she’s very different from pretty. She has the most beautiful face I
ever saw. It’s like what I fancy a queen’s must be.”

“You hear how plain-spoken she is,” said Hermione’s father. “She told me
just as openly,--but far less complimentarily,--what she thought of my
face.”

Hermione gazed fondly upon the face in question, and smiled.

“Then you wouldn’t like to know you were never to look upon it
again,--for all its ugliness; eh, little one?” said the owner, laughing,
and turning to Paulina.

“‘Like to know!’” she repeated, with more than even her usual gravity.
“It would make me very unhappy. I have taken a great fancy to your
face--to you--I should be very, very miserable if I thought--”

The child stopped, with a break in her voice that was even more eloquent
than speech.

The man was touched with the artless evidence of liking in this sincere
little creature. After the pause of a minute, he said: “Come, give me a
kiss upon this ugly cheek of mine. I’ll promise you that you shall
hereafter see as much of this homely face that you’ve taken a fancy to
as you could wish. You and I are friends for life; for you saved mine,
remember.”

“If she don’t remember it, we ever will, will we not, my father?” said
Hermione, as Paulina stood on tiptoe beside him, and gave him the kiss
he had asked, heartily and affectionately, saying at the same time, with
playfulness: “I trust to this promise, though you broke the other. I’ll
believe you will keep your word, that we shall be always friends,
though you have not yet kept your word, and told me who you are. I ought
to have held back my kiss, till I knew who claimed it.”

“I have a father’s right to it,” answered he. “I am your father, while
your own is away.”

“My father!” she exclaimed.

“Your father!” he repeated; “the father of all my subjects,--the father
of my people. I am the Emperor of Russia.”

Paulina stood gazing at him fixedly, in utter astonishment. Her face
worked eagerly; her breath went and came. Then she dropped upon her
knees, flung her head on his, and clasped them around, as she exclaimed:
“My father! My own father! Think of him! Grant him his freedom! Pardon
him! Remember the Christ-child, whose day this is! For His sake pardon
my father!”

The emperor kindly bent over her, and spoke soothingly.

Presently she started up. “Yet why do I say, ‘Pardon him.’ He has done
nothing that needs pardon. He has been ever loyal and faithful. Do him
justice! Redress the wrong that has been done him, and restore to
yourself a devoted officer and servant!”

“If only for his child’s sake--” the emperor began.

But Paulina interrupted him with: “Not for mine! Not because I happened
to do you a service! But because he himself deserves to be freed--he who
has been punished as a traitor, when he was none.”

“Never fear, little Conscientious!” said the monarch, laughing. “Entire
justice shall be done. Your father shall have the benefit of a close
investigation into his case. Will that satisfy you?”

“Quite,” she said in her grave way.

“And now, you will tell all your adventures, my father, will you not?”
said the calm, sweet voice of Hermione.

[Illustration]

“I will tell you the whole story,” said the emperor, drawing her within
his arm, as before, while he left his other hand in the grasp of
Paulina. “I was on my road hither from Kief to keep the Christmas time,
when the sledge was by accident overturned, just on the borders of the
forest. My people helped me into a sort of miserable cabin,--the nearest
at hand; and, as my clothes had become wet with the snow, when I arrived
there I donned some of the good man’s dry apparel in place of mine own,
until they could be dried. While this was being done, feeling stifled
with the smoky atmosphere of the cabin, I strolled forth into the open
air. The snow-storm had abated. I wandered on, striking into the forest,
until, at length, the snow beginning to fall thickly again, I woke up to
a sense of danger,--that I was losing my way,--that I should be unable
to retrace it,--that I should find difficulty in making my people aware
of my situation. I shouted, but in vain. I plunged desperately on, but
felt that I only involved myself further, and that each step but
diminished the chances of rescue. In this perplexity I encountered my
little friend here, who kindly took me in hand, and managed for me, when
I could not have helped myself,--Emperor of all the Russias as I
was,--and bit of a thing as she was. While we were housed at her
friendly peasant woman’s hut,--whither she had conducted me for food and
rest,--it happened that my faithful Ivan joined me, having found where I
had taken refuge. He had set out in search of me, the instant he learned
I was missing, and had succeeded in tracking me there. It was while
Paulina was in the inner room that he entered the outer one where I sat.
He could hardly restrain an exclamation of joy when he discovered me;
but I made him a signal of silence, and in a low voice rapidly explained
my desire that he should go back to his fellows, bid them meet me on the
following day with the carriage at the village post-house, and observe,
with them, the utmost care in avoiding any betrayal of my identity.”

“Ah, I thought I heard voices!” exclaimed Paulina, who had been
listening breathlessly to this account; “low as you spoke, I heard you!”

“Your instructions were obeyed, my dear father, and you were able to
remain unknown for any other than the poor man you seemed?” said
Hermione.

“All went well,” replied her father. “The sledge met us at the place
appointed, and the men played their parts to perfection.

“Well, when we arrived here,” he resumed, “Little Scrupulous must needs
take it into her head that I was a burglar, stealing into a strange
dwelling-house, and roundly she took me to task for my evil deeds, and
for endeavoring to make her an accomplice. But I found means to pacify
her suspicions, until your appearance did them all away, teaching her to
confide in the belief that your father was an honest man, as I have come
to the same conclusion respecting hers, through a like guarantee. Well
is it for a parent, when his child’s ingenuous face vouches for his own
integrity.”

Paulina’s father was recalled from exile; his innocence triumphantly
proved, while he himself was reinstated in all his former possessions;
the emperor graciously and distinctly signifying that it was a simple
act of justice, and that he himself rejoiced to have a faithful subject
restored to his service.

On his return, he found his little daughter in high favor at court. She
was encouraged and indulged by the emperor, who took a strange fancy to
that familiarity and blunt sincerity in her, the least approach to which
he would have so strongly resented in any other being. Hermione took a
great liking to Paulina, and had for her that firmest and most enduring
of regards, an attachment founded on confidence, esteem, and respect.
They grew up together, less like princess and dependant, than friends.

Her father’s military duties taking him away from home a great deal,
little Paulina remained with the princess, eventually becoming one of
her ladies in waiting, and finally marrying a Sicilian nobleman. In her
far-away home she often entertained her children by telling them tales
of the fatherland, not the least interesting of which was the story of
the happiest Christmas she ever knew,--the one on which she rescued the
emperor in the forest, and obtained her father’s pardon.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LITTLE PAULINA ***

***** This file should be named 64103-0.txt or 64103-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
    https://www.gutenberg.org/6/4/1/0/64103/

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
